The NCAA Men’s Tournament is over and Gonzaga/UNC is the 2017 National Champion.  Congrats to them, and all participants this year.  This year someone emailed me a local news article (http://www.local10.com/sports/college-basketball/miami-florida-florida-state-all-heading-to-big-dance) from Local10 ABC affiliate in the Miami – Ft Lauderdale area that said this was the first year that all three of Florida, Florida State and Miami all made the tournament.

I thought this was an interesting statistic but it left several questions.  Anyone who glanced at the bracket saw that FSU’s first round match up was against Florida Gulf Coast.  So technically four teams from the Sunshine State made the tournament.  Florida Gulf Coast was mentioned as an afterthought in the Local10 article when they mentioned who the three teams’ first round opponents.  It got me thinking, what about the other schools in previous years?  In college football, people often refer to UF, FSU and Miami as the big three, but is that the case in basketball?  Does Miami, for example, have substantially more appearances than say Florida Gulf Coast, UCF, Florida A&M or any other school?  Among the Florida basketball schools: who has the most appearances, and who had the first NCAA tournament appearance?  I thought these would be interesting questions to research as a small Python coding task.

Let take a step back and say that just making the tournament is a big honor.  There are two ways to get to the tournament: 1) win a division 1 conference tournament 2) belong to a division 1 conference and be selected as at-large team by the NCAA selection committee for the remainder of the spots.  Teams that win their conference tournament cut down the nets.  Camera crews visit the tournament championship games of lesser known locations just to get a clip of the winning team dancing in celebration at making the NCAA tournament.  Bubble teams sit patiently in a team meeting room as a live camera feed is ready to broadcast them either leaping out of their seats or to have their coach give a disappointing interview.  My favorite memory of a team making the tournament goes back to my first ever trip to Madison Square Garden.  I was visiting a friend who lived in New York and we went to an early round game of the Big East tournament.  It was UConn versus Syracuse.  UConn was poised to vie for a #1 seed, if I remember.  Syracuse, who was having an off year, was considered a bubble team on the outside looking into the tournament.  It was an electric setting.  Two rival fanbases seemed to split the Garden.  We were just hoping for a good game.  Down the stretch as Syracuse hung around it seemed they might have a chance.  As neutral fans looking for a good game, we were swept up in rooting for the underdog.  Syracuse’s point guard Gerry McNamara had hit several 3 pointers to keep Syracuse in the game.  Syracuse was down by 3 and had the ball for the last possession of the game.  As McNamara crossed the half court line, his defender stepped a couple steps beyond the three point arc.  I thought, ‘ok they are determined to take away even a long 3 pointer… McNamara needs to set up a guy for a 3 point play inside...’ but the seconds kept ticking away and McNamara still had space between him and the defender which put him even further from the 3 point line.  He launched up a shot.  ‘I thought what are you thinking?!’.  It went in.  Syracuse forced overtime and won in overtime.  A couple of days later Syracuse won the Big East tournament.  On the front page of espn.com was a picture of McNamara at the top of the ladder.  The article sub header said something to the effect of: Syracuse’s run in the Big East Tournament probably would have earned them at at large bid, but they won and left nothing to chance. They added something to the effect of: and the conference tournament MVP? Was there any doubt?

